Thursday, sir? the time is veryshort.
My father Capulet willhave it so;
And I am nothing slow toslack his haste.
You say you do not knowthe lady's mind:
Uneven is the course, Ilike it not.
Immoderately she weeps forTybalt's death,
And therefore have Ilittle talk'd of love;
For Venus smiles not in ahouse of tears.
Now, sir, her fathercounts it dangerous
That she do give hersorrow so much sway,
And in his wisdom hastesour marriage,
To stop the inundation ofher tears;
Which, too much minded byherself alone,
May be put from her bysociety:
Now do you know the reasonof this haste.
I would I knew not why itshould be slow'd.
Look, sir, here comes thelady toward my cell.
Happily met, my lady andmy wife!
That may be, sir, when Imay be a wife.
That may be must be, love,on Thursday next.
What must be shall be.
That's a certain text.
Come you to makeconfession to this father?
To answer that, I shouldconfess to you.
Do not deny to him thatyou love me.
I will confess to you thatI love him.
So will ye, I am sure,that you love me.
If I do so, it will be ofmore price,
Being spoke behind yourback, than to your face.
Are you at leisure, holyfather, now;
Or shall I come to you atevening mass?
My leisure serves me,pensive daughter, now.
My lord, we must entreatthe time alone.
God shield I shoulddisturb devotion!
Juliet, on Thursday earlywill I rouse ye:
Till then, adieu; and keepthis holy kiss.
O shut the door! and whenthou hast done so,
Come weep with me; pasthope, past cure, past help!
Ah, Juliet, I already knowthy grief;
It strains me past thecompass of my wits:
I hear thou must, andnothing may prorogue it,
On Thursday next bemarried to this county.
Tell me not, friar, thatthou hear'st of this,
Unless thou tell me how Imay prevent it:
If, in thy wisdom, thoucanst give no help,
Do thou but call myresolution wise,
And with this knife I'llhelp it presently.
God join'd my heart andRomeo's, thou our hands;
And ere this hand, by theeto Romeo seal'd,
Shall be the label toanother deed,
Or my true heart withtreacherous revolt
Turn to another, thisshall slay them both:
Therefore, out of thylong-experienced time,
Give me some presentcounsel, or, behold,
'Twixt my extremes and methis bloody knife
Shall play the umpire,arbitrating that
Which the commission ofthy years and art
Could to no issue of truehonour bring.
Be not so long to speak; Ilong to die,
If what thou speak'stspeak not of remedy.
Hold, daughter: I do spy akind of hope,
Which craves as desperatean execution
As that is desperate whichwe would prevent.
If, rather than to marryCounty Paris,
Thou hast the strength ofwill to slay thyself,
Then is it likely thouwilt undertake
A thing like death tochide away this shame.
O, bid me leap, ratherthan marry Paris,
From off the battlementsof any tower;
Or walk in thievish ways;or bid me lurk
Where serpents are; chainme with roaring bears;
Or hide me nightly in acharnel-house,
O'er-cover'd quite withdead men's rattling bones,
With reeky shanks andyellow chapless skulls;
Or bid me go into anew-made grave
And hide me with a deadman in his shroud;
Things that, to hear themtold, have made me tremble;
And I will do it withoutfear or doubt,
To live an unstain'd wifeto my sweet love.
Hold, then; go home, bemerry, give consent
To marry Paris: Wednesdayis to-morrow:
To-morrow night look thatthou lie alone;
Let not thy nurse lie withthee in thy chamber:
Take thou this vial, beingthen in bed,
And this distilled liquordrink thou off;
When presently through allthy veins shall run
A cold and drowsy humour,for no pulse
Shall keep his nativeprogress, but surcease:
No warmth, no breath,shall testify thou livest;
The roses in thy lips andcheeks shall fade
To paly ashes, thy eyes'windows fall,
Like death, when he shutsup the day of life;
Each part, deprived ofsupple government,
Shall, stiff and stark andcold, appear like death:
And in this borrow'dlikeness of shrunk death
Shalt thou continue twoand forty hours,
And then awake as from apleasant sleep.
Now, when the bridegroomin the morning comes
To rouse thee from thybed, there art thou dead:
Then, as the manner of ourcountry is,
In thy best robesuncover'd on the bier
Thou shalt be borne tothat same ancient vault
Where all the kindred ofthe Capulets lie.
In the mean time,
Shall Romeo by my lettersknow our drift,
And hither shall he come:and he and I
Will watch thy waking, andthat very night
Shall Romeo bear theehence to Mantua.
And this shall free theefrom this present shame;
If no inconstant toy, norwomanish fear,
Abate thy valour in theacting it.
O give me, give me!
O, tell not me of fear!
Hold; get you gone, bestrong and prosperous
In this resolve: I'll senda friar with speed
To Mantua, with my lettersto thy lord.
Love give me strength! andstrength shall help afford.
Farewell, dear father!
Samson!
My fan.
Before, and at pace.
How now, my headstrong!where have you beengadding?
Where I have learn'd me torepent the sin
Of disobedient opposition
To you and your behests,and am enjoin'd
By holy Laurence to fallprostrate here,
To beg your pardon:pardon, I beseech you!
Henceforward I am everruled by you.
Send for the county; gotell him of this:
I'll have this knot knitup to-morrow morning.
I met the youthful lord atLaurence' cell;
And gave him what becomedlove I might,
Not step o'er the boundsof modesty.
Why, I am glad on't; thisis well: stand up:
This is as't should be.
Let me see the county;
Ay, marry, go, I say, andfetch him hither.
Now, afore God! thisreverend holy friar,
And all our whole city ismuch bound to him.
Nurse, will you go with meinto my closet,
To help me sort suchneedful ornaments
As you think fit tofurnish me to-morrow?
No, not till Thursday;there is time enough.
Go, nurse, go with her:we'll to church to-morrow.
We shall be short in ourprovisions:
'Tis now near night.
Tush, I will stir about,
And all things will bewell, I warrant thee, wife:
Go thou with Juliet, helpto deck up her;
I'll not to bed to-night;let me alone;
I'll play the housewifefor this once.
What, ho!
They are all forth.
Well, I will walk myself
To County Paris, andprepare up him
Against to-morrow: myheart is wondrous light,
Since this same waywardgirl is so reclaim'd.
Ay, those attires arebest: but, gentle nurse,
I pray thee, leave me tomy self to-night,
For I have need of manyorisons
To move the heavens tosmile upon my state,
Which, well thou know'st,is cross, and full of sin.
What, are you busy, ho?need you my help?
No, madam; we have cull'dnecessaries
As are behoveful for ourstate to-morrow:
So please you, let me nowbe left alone,
And let the nurse thisnight sit up with you;
For, I am sure, you haveyour hands full all,
In this so suddenbusiness.
Good night:
Get thee to bed, and rest;for thou hast need.
Farewell!
God knows when we shallmeet again.
I have a faint cold fearthrills through my veins,
That almost freezes up theheat of life:
I'll call them back againto comfort me: Nurse!
What should she do here?
My dismal scene I needsmust act alone.
Come, vial.
What if this mixture donot work at all?
Shall I be married thento-morrow morning?
No, no: this shall forbidit: lie thou there.
What if it be a poison,which the friar
Subtly hath minister'd tohave me dead,
Lest in this marriage hebe dishonour'd,
Because he married mebefore to Romeo?
I fear it is: and yet,methinks, it should not,
For he hath still beentried a holy man.
How if, when I am laidinto the tomb,
I wake before the timethat Romeo
Come to redeem me? there'sa fearful point!
Shall I not, then, bestifled in the vault,
To whose foul mouth nohealthsome air breathes in,
And there die strangledere my Romeo comes?
Or, if I live, is it notvery like,
The horrible conceit ofdeath and night,
Together with the terrorof the place--
As in a vault, an ancientreceptacle,
Where, for these manyhundred years, the bones
Of all my buried ancestorsare packed:
Where bloody Tybalt, yetbut green in earth,
Lies festering in hisshroud; where, as they say,
At some hours in the nightspirits resort--
Alack, alack, is it notlike that I,
So early waking, what withloathsome smells,
And shrieks like mandrakestorn out of the earth,
That living mortals,hearing them, run mad--
O, if I wake, shall I notbe distraught,
Environed with all thesehideous fears?
And madly play with myforefather's joints?
And pluck the mangledTybalt from his shroud?
And, in this rage, withsome great kinsman's bone,
As with a club, dash outmy desperate brains?
O, look! methinks I see mycousin's ghost
Seeking out Romeo, thatdid spit his body
Upon a rapier's point:stay, Tybalt, stay!
Romeo, I come! this do Idrink to thee.
Gregory.
Nurse, take these keys,and fetch more spices.
They call for dates andquinces in the pastry.
Come, stir, stir, stir! thesecond cock hath crow'd,
The curfew-bell hath rung,'tis three o'clock:
Look to the baked meats,good Angelica:
Spare not for the cost.
Go, you cot-quean, go, Getyou to bed; faith,
You'll be sick to-morrowFor this night's watching.
No, not a whit.
I have watch'd ere now
All night for lesser cause,and ne'er been sick.
Ay, you have been amouse-hunt in your time;
But I'll watch you fromsuch watching now.
Jealous hood, a jealoushood!
Well, fellow, what isthere?
Things for the cook, sir;but I know not what.
Make haste, make haste.
Sirrah, fetch drier logs:
Peter will show thee wherethey are.
I have a head, sir, thatwill find out logs,
And never trouble Peterfor the matter.
Mass, and well said; amerry whoreson, ha!
Thou shalt be logger-head.
Good faith, 'tis day:
The county will be herewith music straight,
For so he said he would: Ihear him near.
Nurse! Wife! What, ho!
What, nurse, I say!
Go waken Juliet, help totrim her up;
I'll go and chat withParis: hie, make haste,
Make haste; the bridegroomhe is come already:
Make haste, I say.
Mistress!
what, mistress!
Juliet!
fast, I warrant her, she:
Why, lamb! why, lady! fie,you slug-a-bed!
Why, love, I say! madam!sweet-heart! why, bride!
What, not a word? you takeyour pennyworths now;
Sleep for a week; for thenext night, I warrant,
The County Paris hath setup his rest,
That you shall rest butlittle.
God forgive me, Marry, andamen,
how sound is she asleep!
I needs must wake her.
Madam, madam, madam!
Ay, let the county takeyou in your bed;
He'll fright you up, i'faith. will it not be?
What, dress'd! and in yourclothes!
and down again?
I needs must wake you;
Mada--
Lady!
Alack! alack, my lady'sdead!
Help, help!
O, well-a-day, that ever Iwas born!
Some aqua vitae, ho!
My lord! my lady!
What noise is here?
O lamentable day!
What's the matter?
Look, look!
O heavy day!
My child, my only life,
Revive, look up,
or I will die with thee!
Help, help!
Call help.
For shame, bring Julietforth; her lord is come.
She's dead, deceased,she's dead; alack the day!
Alack the day, she's dead,she's dead, she's dead!
Ha! let me see her:
out, alas! she's cold:
Her blood is settled, andher joints are stiff;
Life and these lips havelong been separated:
Death lies on her like anuntimely frost
Upon the sweetest flowerof all the field.
O lamentable day!
O woeful time!
Death, that hath ta'en herhence to make me wail,
Ties up my tongue, andwill not let me speak.
Come, is the bride readyto go to church?
Ready to go, but never toreturn.
O son! the night beforethy wedding-day
Hath Death lain with thywife.
There she lies,
Flower as she was,deflowered by him.
Death is my son-in-law,Death is my heir;
My daughter he hathwedded: I will die,
And leave him all; life,living, all is Death's.
Have I thought long to seethis morning's face,
And doth it give me such asight as this?
Accursed, unhappy,wretched, hateful day!
Most miserable hour thate'er time saw
In lasting labour of hispilgrimage!
But one, poor one, onepoor and loving child,
But one thing to rejoiceand solace in,
And cruel death hathcatch'd it from my sight!
O woe!
O woeful, woeful, woefulday!
Most lamentable day, mostwoeful day,
That ever, ever, I did yetbehold!
Uncomfortable time, whycamest thou now
To murder, murder oursolemnity?
O child! O child!
my soul, but not my child!
Dead art thou! Alack! mychild is dead;
And with my child my joysare buried.
Peace, ho, for shame!confusion's cure lives not
In these confusions.Heaven and yourself
Had part in this fairmaid; now heaven hath all,
And all the better is itfor the maid:
Dry up your tears, andstick your rosemary
On this fair corse; and,as our custom is,
In all her best array bearher to church:
For though fond naturebids us all lament,
Yet nature's tears arereason's merriment.
All things that weordained festival,
Turn from their office toblack funeral;
Our instruments tomelancholy bells,
Our wedding cheer to a sadburial feast,
Our solemn hymns to sullendirges change,
Our bridal flowers servefor a buried corse,
And all things change themto the contrary.
Sir, go you in; and,madam, go with him;
And go, Sir Paris; all ofyou prepare
To follow this fair corseunto her grave:
The heavens do lour uponyou for some ill;
Move them no more bycrossing their high will.
Faith, we may put up ourpipes, and be gone.
Musicians, O, musicians,"Heart's ease," "Heart's ease:"
O, an you will have melive, play "Heart's ease."
Why "Heart's ease?"
O, musicians, because myheart itself plays
"My heart is full of woe:"
O, play me some merrydump, to comfort me.
Not a dump we; 'tis notime to play now.